# Example dataset
This folder contains a small example dataset that can be used to test our evaluation tools. Sample dataset contains only one group, and was simulated using PBSIM on _D. Melanogaster_ chromosome 4, with coverage 5 and with PacBio ROI parameters. Simulation files (generated by PBSIM) are placed in a folder __group1__, inside a root simulation folder __simulation\_X5__. Headers in the generated fastq file were adjusted as described in [RNAseq_benchmark/Data_preparation.md](/RNAseq_benchmark/Data_preparation.md)

Sample dataset contains 2955 reads.

The folder also contains all files needed to test the dataset and the tools.

Contents of the folder:
- example.fastq - small test dataset, 
- example.sam   - mapping of the example dataset to the reference genome using GraphMap (https://github.com/isovic/graphmap) and it option to map RNA reads with the help of annotations.
- dmelanogaster_chr_genome.fa  - genomic sequence for _D. Melanogaster_ chromosome 4, this represents a reference genome for our example dataset
- dmelanogaster_chr.gft - gene annotations for _D. Melanogaster_ chromosome 4
- dmelanogaster_chr_trans_F.fa - transcriptome for for _D. Melanogaster_ chromosome 4, this is generated from geneomic sequence and annotations using [generate_transcriptome.py](/generate_transcriptome.py). Designation '\_F' means that the transcriptome has been filtered, removing sequences shorter than 100 base-pairs, as required by PBSIM.

### Determining match rate
Matchrate for SAM file contining mappings can be determined using errorrates.py script from https://github.com/isovic/samscripts.

    python /home/kkrizanovic/src/samscripts/src/errorrates.py base dmelanogaster_chr4_genome.fa sample.sam

__Results:__

                       	mean    std     median  min     max
    Error rate:     	9.16%	5.77%	8.51%	0.57%	71.89%
    Insertion rate: 	3.90%	2.80%	3.46%	0.00%	13.32%
    Deletion rate:  	0.97%	1.46%	0.81%	0.00%	60.52%
    Mismatch rate:  	4.29%	2.67%	4.12%	0.00%	13.23%
    Match rate:     	91.80%	5.38%	92.41%	75.06%	100.00%
    Read length:    	2310.96	1518.89	2051.50	97.00	18737.00
    Difference ratio:	48:42:10 (mismatch:insertion:deletion)

The script errorrates.py calculates a detailed error statistics. For our benchmark of RNAseq mapping tools, we have used only mean value for math rate.

### Runnning Process_pbsim_data.py
Evaluation of simulated data is performed using Process_pbsim_data.py script. It requires files generated by PBSIM during simulation proces.

    python /home/kkrizanovic/src/RNAseqEval/Process_pbsim_data.py process ./simulation_X5/ sample.sam dmelanogaster_chr4.gtf

__Output:__

    Analysis results:
    Original Samlines: 2955
    Usable whole alignments (with valid CIGAR string): 2852
    Annotations: 334
    Multiexon genes: 316
    Number of exon start hits: 13685
    Number of exon end hits: 13653
    Number of exon start and end hits: 86729
    Number of good whole alignments: 1362
    MAF: Hit both ends: 322
    MAF: Hit all parts: 2017
    MAF: Hit at least one part: 2543
    MAF: Equals at least one part: 2069
    MAF: Number of split reads: 2340
    MAF: Hit both ends, SPLIT read: 235
    MAF: Hit all parts, SPLIT read: 1618
    MAF: Hit at least one part, SPLIT read: 2144
    MAF: Equals at least one part, SPLIT read: 1885

We can see that out of total 2955 reads, 2852 were mapped. Out of those, only 322 correctly match beginning and end of the read origin within 5 base-pairs (__Hit both ends__). However, more than 2000 alignments overlap all exons from read origin (__Hit all parts__) and over 2500 reads overlap at least one exon from read origin (__Hit at least one part__). We cab say that, in general, the alignments are quite correct, i nost cases mappint to the approximate position of read origin, but they are not very precise, very rarely mapping to the beginning and end or read origin within 5 base-pairs.

### Running RNAseqEval.py
Evaluation of real data is performed using RNAseqEval.py script. It requires gene annotations for comparison to mappings.

    python /home/kkrizanovic/src/RNAseqEval/RNAseqEval.py eval-mapping dmelanogaster_chr4_genome.fa sample.sam -a dmelanogaster_chr4.gtf

__Output:__

    Reference format: ANNOTATION
    General information:
    Reference length = 1348131 bp
    Number of chromosomes = 1
    Chromosomes:
            chr4: 5537446bp

    Number of alignments in SAM file (total / unique) = 2955 / 2955
    Alignments with / without CIGAR string = 2852 / 103
    Mapping quality without zeroes (avg / min / max) = 11202.77 / 134 / 78995
    Alignments with mapping quality (>0 / =0) = 27545 / 0
    Number of matches / mismatches / inserts / deletes = 5459186 / 870685 / 259341 / 64612
    Percentage of matches / mismatches / inserts / deletes = 0.82 / 0.13 / 0.04 / 0.01

    Annotation statistics:
    Total gene length = 4189315
    Number of Transcripts / Exons (Multiexon transcripts) = 334 / 3131 (316)
    Maximum number of exons in a gene = 46
    Gene size (Min / Max / Avg) = 69 / 52075 / 12542.86
    Exon size (Min / Max / Avg) = 6 / 9812 / 426.99

    Mapping quality information:
    Bases in reads (aligned / total) (percent) = (6589212 / 6590850) (99.98%)
    Transcripts covered / missed / total = 237 / 97 / 334
    Exons covered / missed / total = 2055 / 1076 / 3131
    Alignments on transcript hit / missed = 2852 / 0
    Alignments on exons hit / missed = 2852 / 0
    Alignments hitting an exon (start / end / both) = 13530 / 13543 / 11456
    Contiguous / non contiguous alignments: 1738 (60.92%) / 1114 (39.05%)

    Transcript/exon expression and coverage information:
    Number of expressed Transcripts = 237
    Expressed transcripts: ...

